New "Write Oso Policies" tutorial (#751)
osohq/oso: new-docs/content/any/getting-started/policies/index.md

as a simple declarative sentence of English (or other natural language),
it should be straightforward to turn into a Polar rule.

If you're unsure of what _kind_ of authorization policy to write,
you may want to head over to the [Conceptual Guides](learn) or
start with a familiar pattern such as [roles](/guides/roles).
This tutorial will not be concerned with a specific kind of policy,
but rather with the language in which many different kinds of
policies may be expressed.

## Application Setup

In this guide, we'll use the sample expenses app from the
[Quickstart](quickstart) guide as an example. It provides a
simple `Expense` class that models an expense record (e.g.,
for a work-related purchase) that a user might create, read,
update, or delete.

An authorization policy for such an application might include
rules such as:
* A user may read any `Expense` that they submitted.
* A user may approve an `expense` instance if they manage the
  user that submitted it and the amount is less than some maximum.

The rest of this tutorial will be concerned with how to turn
informal English rules like the above into concrete Polar rules
that the Oso library can enforce.

## Queries

> _FIXME: This suction sucks, but something like it is needed._

Author: It took me a day to get this joke, since I (obviously) didn't see the typo in the first place.

Like `or`, they may only be used in rule bodies, i.e., after an `if`.)

Yet another way to write this policy would be to use the `in` operator:
```polar
allow(_actor, action, _resource) if
    action in ["GET", "POST", "DELETE"];
```

Here the list of allowed actions is encoded as a literal Polar list
(comma separated terms between square brackets). The `in` operator
is a membership check: it succeeds when its left-hand side (`action`)
appears anywhere in its right-hand side (the list `["GET", "POST",
"DELETE"]`), which is true just when the left-hand side equals the
list's first element, *or* its second element, *or* its third
element, .... So this rule means the same thing as the ones above.

## Classes, Instances, and Fields

In our example app, an action is represented by a string, but the
resources we're protecting are instances of our `Expense` model class.
Let's use its `submitted_by` field to implement the sample rule:

* A user may read any `Expense` that they submitted.

One way to write such a rule in Polar is like this:

```polar
allow(actor, "GET", resource) if
    resource.submitted_by = actor;
```

> The Polar term `resource.submitted_by` refers to the `submitted_by`

Reviewer: Would be good to explicitly say that we can pass application objects into queries, so we can write rules over them. I know we say it before, but good to reinforce what's happening here.

field of the `resource` object. Comparing that value to the `actor`
represents the "that they submitted" constraint of the English rule
above.

This rule, however, has a problem: it assumes that there _is_
a `submitted_by` field on the `resource` object. If we happened
to pass a different kind of object, this rule would fail, but in
a potentially confusing and error-prone way. To fix this, we can
add an explicit type check using the `matches` operator:

```polar
allow(actor, "GET", resource) if
    resource matches Expense and
    resource.submitted_by = actor;
```

Here `Expense` is the application model class, and `matches` checks
that its left-hand side is an instance of its right (or any subclass
thereof). If that type check fails, the next term won't be evaluated.

In order for Polar to use a class in a type check, it must be
_registered_. If you're using an ORM adapter, this happens
automatically for all model classes; otherwise, you'll have

> to register classes manually using `Oso.register_class`. If

Reviewer: We can link to the API docs for the appropriate language here.

you forget, Polar will warn you about an "unknown specializer"
at load time.

> ### Specializers

Reviewer: Great transition here and perfect way to build up to specializers.

Since type checks are common and helpful for rule arguments,
Polar provides a shortcut syntax:

```polar
allow(actor, "GET", resource: Expense) if
    resource.submitted_by = actor;
```

This rule only matches an `allow` query whose third argument is an
instance of the `Expense` class, and so we may safely access fields
we know exist in such instances. These type restrictions are called
_specializers_, and we say that, e.g., the `resource` parameter
is _specialized_ on the `Expense` class.

You may specialize on any argument; if our actors were instances
of a `User` class, for instance, we could write:

```polar
allow(actor: User, "GET", resource: Expense) if ...;
```

### Built-in Classes

We said above that any class you wish to use as a specializer
(or on the right-hand side of the `matches` operator) must be
registered with Polar. For convenience, Polar automatically
registers a few classes, such as:

* `Dictionary`
* `String`
* `List`
* `Integer`
* `Float`

These classes correspond to ones in the application language,

> e.g., in Python, `String` is actually the built-in `str` class.

Reviewer: We can link to appropriate reference docs here.

Reviewer: Still think this would be good, but again it requires language-specific docs for each, so would do this last if time.

## Method Calls

> In addition to accessing fields in a rule, you can also call methods
> on application objects. We'll demonstrate this using the built-in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to accessing the fields of application objects in a rule, you can also call methods on application objects. We'll demonstrate this using the built-in
```

`String` class, but it applies to instances any registered class.

Suppose we decided to change our encoding of actions so that
every "read" action started with the letter "r". We could allow
all such actions using a rule like this:

> ```polar

Reviewer: this will be specific to Python, so we will need to parametrize it.

allow(_actor, action: String, _resource) if
    action.startswith("r");
```

## Other Rules

So far all of our examples have involved only `allow` rules
with three parameters. That's a natural place to start with Oso,
because the `is_allowed` function generates queries of the form
`allow(actor, action, resource)`. But you can write rules for

> whatever you like, and query them from within your `allow` rules.

Reviewer: This is a great explanation, and we should keep it here. But I think as mentioned in my earlier comment, having something similar to this when we first introduce `allow` rules, to foreshadow this section, would be great.

guides, and the [Polar Syntax guide](polar-syntax) has a detailed
description of the language syntax and features.

The purpose of _this_ guide is to serve as a tutorial introduction
to the Polar language. When you've finished it, you should be able
to read and write simple Polar rules over your own application objects
and types.

If you have some prior exposure to logic programming, the Polar
language will feel very familiar. If not, don't panic! Polar is
designed to be simple, often allowing more concise
expression of authorization rules than equivalent code in an
imperative language. If you can express an authorization rule
as a simple declarative sentence of English (or other natural language),
it should be straightforward to turn into a Polar rule.

If you're unsure of what _kind_ of authorization policy to write,
you may want to head over to the [Conceptual Guides](learn) or
start with a familiar pattern such as [roles](/guides/roles).
This tutorial will not be concerned with a specific kind of policy,
but rather with the language in which many different kinds of
policies may be expressed.

> ## Application Setup

Reviewer: This section is great. Perfect amount of context in my opinion.

To use Oso for authorization, your application must first:

1. Load the Oso library: `from oso import Oso`
2. Create an `Oso` instance: `oso = Oso()`
3. Load a policy: `oso.load_file(policy)`.

Then, at authorization time, you can call:

```python
oso.is_allowed(actor, action, resource)
```

This returns a boolean indicating whether the given `actor`
is authorized to perform `action` on `resource` according to
the current policy.

The arguments to `oso.is_allowed` may be arbitrary {{< lang >}}
objects. We'll often use strings for examples, but in your
application they could be ORM model objects, URIs, numbers, etc.

## Rules

> The way you control _which_ boolean value is returned by
> `oso.is_allowed` is to define and load Polar rules that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way you control whether
`oso.is_allowed` returns `true` or `false` is to define and load Polar rules that
```

> _match_ only the desired set of `actor`, `action`, and `resource`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**match** only the desired set of `actor`, `action`, and `resource`
```

arguments. This matching may involve logical connectives,
type checks, equality checks, variable bindings, field lookups,
method calls, arithmetic, comparisons, etc. See the
[Polar Syntax guide](polar-syntax) for a complete list
of available operators.

Let's start with the basic syntax. A _rule definition_ in Polar

> has a _name_, a _parameter list_, and an optional _body_. Here's

Reviewer: In general I think it's more clear to use **bold face** for keyword-type emphasis (as here), and _italics_ for emphasis. When I see lots of italics, I read it as if someone is speaking very deliberately and emphasizing each word.

Author: Ok. I have a very academic habit of emphasizing the first occurrence of every new keyword or technical term, but don't have strong feelings on what kind of emphasis to use. Switched to bold so we can use italics for ordinary emphasis.

a very simple rule definition:

```polar
allow("Zora", "read", "resource");
```

The name of this rule is `allow`. It has three string-valued
parameters: `"Zora"`, `"read"`, and `"resource"`. The terminating
semicolon comes right after the parameter list, so it has no body;

> we say that it is _unconditional_, or a _fact_.

Reviewer: Not sure if we want to throw "fact" into the mix. 
```suggestion
we say that it is _unconditional_, meaning no additional conditions must be met in order for it to be true.
```

Here's a _conditional_ rule definition:

```polar

> allow("Zora", "read", "resource") if 1 = 0;

Reviewer: This might be less confusing, since we are using numerics.
```suggestion
allow("Zora", "read", "resource") if 1 == 0;
```

as strings for now, but we'll see richer representations in just
a moment. We could express this policy with the following three
Polar rule definitions:

```polar
allow("Abagail", "read", "resource");
allow("Carol", "read", "resource");
allow("Johann", "read", "resource");
```

These rules represent _facts_ — statements that are unconditionally
true. After we load this file into the knowledge base, Oso "knows"
these three facts.

We can then make authorization decisions from our {{< lang >}}
application by calling:

```python
oso.is_allowed("Johann", "read", "resource")
```

The Oso library issues a Polar query to the knowledge base:

```polar
allow("Johann", "read", "resource")
```

The knowledge base _searches_ for a definition that matches the query.
In this case all three rules match the name `allow`, but the
first two rules' first parameters fail to match the first supplied
argument, since (in Polar notation), `"Abagail" != "Johann"` and
`"Carol" != "Johann"`. The third rule, however, matches each of
the arguments with its corresponding parameter: `"Johann" = "Johann"`,
`"read" = "read"`, and `"resource" = "resource"`. So the query

> succeeds, and `oso.is_allowed` returns `True`.

Reviewer: I think we need one sentence here explaining that only one rule must succeed for a query to succeed, to make it clear that rules are only additive and not subtractive. We could also state it as each rule definition represents an implicit "or". Just something to hit that home at the end of this.

## Variables

In the example above, `allow` rules were used to explicitly
enumerate sets of permissions using exact matching (value equality).
That style of rule is sometimes useful, but such policies can become
unmanageably large. The Polar knowledge base does index rules,
so policies containing tens or hundreds of thousands of rules like
that can still be used efficiently should your application and
policy require it, but it's not really recommended.

What we usually want instead is to write rules that match more
than one argument by exploiting regularities or abstractions in
our application objects and policy. For instance, each of the three
rules above has the same second and third parameters, so we can
collapse all three rules into one if we _conditionally_ match the

> first argument. We can do that by _binding_ a _variable_ called

Reviewer: I say this because I know the concept of creating variables has been a source of confusion in the past.

> first argument. We can do that by _binding_ a _variable_ called

Author: Agreed. Added a `Binding` section as suggested later, but not entirely happy with it. LMK if it's an improvement, or how we can make it clear.er

> first argument. We can do that by _binding_ a _variable_ called

Reviewer: I think it's great!

allowed names:

```polar
allow(actor, "read", "resource") if
    actor = "Abagail" or
    actor = "Carol" or
    actor = "Johann";
```

We would read this in English as: "allow an actor to read resource
if the actor is Abagail, or it is Carol, or is Johann". Admittedly,
this doesn't seem to buy us much over what we had, but we can refactor
again using the built-in list membership operator `in`:

```polar
allow(actor, "read", "resource") if
    actor in ["Abagail", "Carol", "Johann"];
```

Now we have a single rule that can be easily modified if our
allowed list of users changes.

## Instances and Fields

We still have an explicit enumeration of permissions in the rule
above. That's fine for users represented by strings and such, but
most applications use more structured representations for their
actors, actions, and resources.

Suppose then that our actors are represented by instances of a
{{< lang >}} `User` class, with, say, a user ID and administrator
flag:

```python
@dataclass
class User:
    id: int
    admin: bool
```

Let's also assume also a simple `Resource` class, with an `owner`
field that references a user ID:

```python
@dataclass
class Resource:
    owner: int

> ```

Reviewer: Consistency check: if we change "resource" above to be "document:ID", we can change this class to be a `Document` class as well.

The two policy rules we'll implement are:

* A user that is an administrator may read any resource.
* A user may read any resource that they own.

Our application will be making calls like this:

> ```python
> oso.is_allowed(User(id=0, admin=True), "read", Resource(owner=0))
> ```

Reviewer: For readability, take or leave

```suggestion
```python
user = User(id=0, admin=True)
resource = Resource(owner=0)
oso.is_allowed(user, "read", resource)
```
```

Author: Leave, but with reason: we have the same sort of one-liner later, and I think leaving them as one-liners makes it easier to visually spot the difference between them.

> We can implement our policy rules by binding `user` and `resource`

Reviewer: Could consider adding a step to explain what the query is in between the library call and the rules, like you did earlier. Though I'm not exactly sure how we would want to represent the `user` and `resource` arguments if we were showing a Polar query. E.g., `allow(PythonInstance{tag: User, id: 1}, "read", PythonInstance{tag: Resource, id: 2})` seems weird. But it's helpful to separate the rules from the query mentally.

variables to the first and third arguments, then using the `.`
("dot") operator to lookup field values in the bodies:

> ```polar
> allow(user, "read", resource) if
>     user.admin = true;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```polar
# A user that is an administrator may read any resource. 
allow(user, "read", resource) if
    user.admin = true;
```

> allow(user, "read", resource) if
>     user.id = resource.owner;
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# A user may read any resource that they own.
allow(user, "read", resource) if
    user.id = resource.owner;
```
```

Lookups happen at query time, on the live application objects;

> Polar uses a foreign-function interface to perform the lookup

Reviewer: Perhaps a link to Wikipedia for FFI? Or a better reference if you know one.

would yield values that satisfy the conditions. If the call were,
however, something like:

```python
oso.is_allowed(User(id=1, admin=False), "read", Resource(owner=0))
```

This call would return `False`, since neither rule would match
the supplied instances. The first rule would fail because the
`admin` flag isn't true, and the second because the user's ID
`1` isn't equal to the resource's owner ID `0`.

## Classes

There's a potential problem with the rules above: they refer to fields
of objects without checking the _types_ of those objects. For example,
if we were to pass strings again instead of instances, we'd get an error
at query time:

```console
query> allow("Johann", "read", "resource")
PolarRuntimeError
...
Application error: 'str' object has no attribute 'admin'
```

To guard against this, we can add explicit type checks using
the Polar `matches` operator:

```polar
allow(user, "read", resource) if
    actor matches User and
    user.admin = true;

allow(user, "read", resource) if
    user matches User and
    resource matches Resource and
    user.id = resource.owner;
```

The `matches` operator succeeds when its left-hand side is an

> instance of (a subclass of) its right-hand side. For our example

Reviewer: I think(?) a class is technically a subclass of itself, but saying that "instance of" and "subclass of" are the same might throw some people off. Perhaps "is an instance of the type specified on its right-hand side. This means that the type of the instance on the left must be the type specified on the right-hand side, or a subclass of that type."

query above, since `str` is not a subclass of either `User`

> or `Resource`, the `matches` would fail, and not raise an error.

Reviewer: Phrasing seems funny here.
```suggestion
or `Resource`, the `matches` would fail, causing Polar to stop evaluating the rule before attempting to access any non-existent fields (and raising an error). 
```

Here `User` and `Resource` refer to the application classes defined
above. But in order for Polar to use a class in a type check, it must
first be _registered_. If you're using an ORM adapter, this happens
automatically for all model classes; otherwise, you can register

> classes manually using `Oso.register_class`. If you forget, Polar

Reviewer: Link to API docs here (but this will be language-specific, so adds a lot of overhead). I would do this last if time.

> will warn you about an "unknown specializer" at load time.

Reviewer: Readout of this warning for the above rules would be nice, but low priority.

### Specializers

Since type checks are common and helpful for rule parameters,
Polar provides a shortcut syntax:

```polar
allow(user: User, "read", resource: Resource) if
    user.admin = true;

allow(user: User, "read", resource: Resource) if
    user.id = resource.owner;
```

These rules mean the same thing as the ones above, but their
first and third parameters are _specialized_ on the `User`
and `Resource` classes, respectively: they will only match
when the supplied arguments are instances of (subclasses of)
those classes.

It's considered good practice to use a specializer on any

> parameter whose fields you access.

Reviewer: In the future, it would be great to have a "next level" guide that goes into cool stuff like field-level specializers. We don't have any great docs on this specific thing now, but maybe we can add a TODO here to link to them once we have it. 

Or, we could add one sentence explaining it here if you're up for it. E.g., "pattern matching can go beyond simple type checks as well. Field-level specializers can be especially useful for ensuring certain fields exist before entering a rule body:
```
allow(user: User{id: user_id}, "read", resource: Resource{owner: resource_owner}) if
    user_id = resource_owner;
```
For more information on pattern matching in Polar, see the [syntax guide](polar-syntax#rules)."

registered with Polar. For convenience, Polar automatically
registers a few _built-in_ classes, such as:

* `Dictionary`
* `String`
* `List`
* `Integer`
* `Float`

These classes correspond to ones in the application language,
e.g., in Python, `String` is actually the built-in `str` class.

## Method Calls

In addition to accessing the fields of application objects in a rule,
you can also call methods on them. We'll demonstrate this using the
built-in `String` class, but it applies to instances of any registered
class.

Suppose we wanted to match a range of actions that all started
with the letter "r". (A silly encoding, perhaps, but illustrative.)
We could allow all such actions using a rule like this:

```polar
allow(actor, action: String, resource) if
    action.startswith("r");
```

This calls the {{< lang >}} method `str.startswith`, guarding
against invalid calls with the `String` specializer.

## Other Rules

So far all of our examples have involved only `allow` rules
with three parameters. That's a natural place to start with Oso,
because the `is_allowed` function generates queries of the form
`allow(actor, action, resource)`. But you can write rules for

> whatever you like, and use them from within your `allow` rules.

Reviewer: I think it's worth adding one sentence somewhere in this section that lets the reader know they can also use the `query_rule()` method to query arbitrary rules directly from the application. Perhaps at the very end.

For instance, the built-in [roles library](/guides/roles) supplies an
`allow` rule that looks like this:

```polar
allow(user, action, resource) if
    resource_role_applies_to(resource, role_resource) and
    user_in_role(user, role, role_resource) and
    role_allow(role, action, resource);
```

Because all three parameters are variables, any three arguments

> will match the head, by binding. But queries for each of the body

Reviewer: This almost makes me want to have a subsection under the previous "Variables" section dedicated to binding, so that if the reader already forgot what "binding" means we could send them back there. Interested if you think this would be helpful.

above as:

```polar
# A user that is an administrator may read any document.
allow(user: User{admin: true}, "read", document: Document);

# A user may read any document that they own.
allow(user: User{id: user_id}, "read", document: Document{owner: document_owner}) if
    user_id = document_owner;
```

Notice that we've dropped the body from the first rule, since
the required condition is now handled entirely by the specializer,
by matching the value of `user.admin` against the literal `true`.

In the second rule, the first specializer binds the variable
`user_id` to the value of `user.id`, and the second binds
`document_owner` to that of `document.owner`. The unification
in the body checks that those two values are equal. But we can
drop that, too, by using the same variable in both specializers:

```polar
# A user may read any document that they own.
allow(user: User{id: user_id}, "read", document: Document{owner: user_id});
```

The first specializer binds `user_id` to `user.id`. Then, since
`user_id` is already bound, the second specializer compares its
value against that of `document.owner`, making the explicit
unification unnecessary.

> 

Reviewer: Excellent explanation!
